---
title: Port based network access control (802.1x)
parent: Network Configuration
---

# Port Based Network Access Control (802.1x)

**Note**: The support for 802.1x was added with the BISDN Linux release 4.9
within the major version 4 stream and 5.3 within the major version 5 stream.
{: .label .label-yellow }

## Introduction

IEEE 802.1X is a network access control protocol that provides authentication
and security for wired and wireless networks. It ensures that only authorized
devices and users can connect to a network by using a process called port-based
network access control (PNAC).

802.1X operates with three key components:

1. Supplicant (Client/Device) – The device that wants to connect to the
    network (e.g., a laptop or access point).
2. Authenticator (Network Switch/Access Point) – The gateway that enforces
    authentication before allowing network access.
3. Authentication Server (e.g. RADIUS Server) – The backend system that
    verifies credentials and grants or denies access.

On BISDN Linux, we provide an integrated
[freeRADIUS](https://www.freeradius.org/) Server on the switch to allow using
802.1x without the need to set up an external authentication server.

Authentication Flow:

1. The supplicant sends authentication credentials (username/password) to the
    authenticator. The following authentication and authorization sequence is
    done via EAPoL (Extensible Authentication Protocol over Local Area Network).
    For supplicants that do not support 802.1x EAPoL, we support MAC
    Authentication Bypass (MAB), allowing authorization based on the
    supplicant's MAC address.
2. The authenticator ([hostapd](https://w1.fi/cvs.html) running on the BISDN
    Linux switch) forwards these credentials (or the MAC as Client Identifier)
    to the authentication server (e.g. freeRADIUS on the BISDN Linux switch).
3. The authentication server validates the credentials and informs the
    authenticator whether to allow or block access.

To use 802.1x on BISDN Linux switches, you need to configure hostapd on the
switch as well as an authentication server. Configuration examples for EAPoL
and MAB (MAC Authentication Bypass) with hostapd and freeRADIUS on the switch
are documented below.

Both example scenarios described below assume that you are familiar with the
configuration of bridges, VLANs and ports on BISDN Linux and that you have set
up a fully functional L2 VLAN bridge between all ports on the switch on which
supplicants are connected. Documentation and examples for L2 VLAN bridge
configurations on BISDN Linux can be found here:

- <https://docs.bisdn.de/network_configuration/vlan_bridging.html#systemd-networkd>

When building a new set up (for testing or production), we recommend to verify
the functionality of the VLAN bridge **BEFORE** adding PNAC with 802.1x.

The only extension we need to enable port based network access control is to set
the `[Link]` `ActivationPolicy` to `manual` for each connected port. This change
is needed, since we want hostapd to control the link state, based on the
authentication and authorization status.

For the systemd example given in the documentation linked above, the
configuration for port1 would need to be extended as shown below.

BEFORE:

20-port1.network:

```ini
[Match]
Name=port1

[Network]
Bridge=swbridge

[BridgeVLAN]
PVID=1
EgressUntagged=1
VLAN=1-10
```

AFTER:

20-port1.network:

```ini
[Match]
Name=port1

[Link]
ActivationPolicy=manual

[Network]
Bridge=swbridge

[BridgeVLAN]
PVID=1
EgressUntagged=1
VLAN=1-10
```

The .netdev and .network configuration of the swbridge can be done in exactly
the same way as described in the linked documentation.

## 802.1x with EAPoL

For this case, we assume that the supplicant is connected to port2 of the BISDN
Linux switch and wants to use EAPoL with the username `bob` and the password
`hello` to authenticate. The BISDN Linux switch follows the EAPoL sequence to
first authenticate and then authorize the supplicant and unlock port2.

### Configuration of freeRADIUS

The upstream configuration reference for freeRADIUS can be found here:

- <https://wiki.freeradius.org/config/Configuration-files>

The freeRADIUS installation on BISDN Linux comes with a set of configuration
files, which can be used without major changes for our testing case.
The only change needed to authenticate and authorize the user `bob` with the
password `hello` is to uncomment those credentials in the file
`/etc/raddb/users` on the switch.

BEFORE:

```text
# The canonical testing user which is in most of the
# examples.
#
#bob    Cleartext-Password := "hello"
#       Reply-Message := "Hello, %{User-Name}"
#
```

AFTER:

```text
# The canonical testing user which is in most of the
# examples.
#
bob    Cleartext-Password := "hello"
#       Reply-Message := "Hello, %{User-Name}"
#
```

After those changes are done, the systemd service for radiusd can be enabled and
started with the commands shown below.

```bash
sudo systemctl enable radiusd.service
sudo systemctl start radiusd.service
```

The freeRADIUS daemon radiusd should now be running and ready to accept
connections and requests from hostapd - which is configured in the next step.

### Configuration of hostapd

The upstream configuration reference for hostapd version 2.10 can be found here:

- <https://w1.fi/cgit/hostap/tree/hostapd/hostapd.conf?h=hostap_2_10>

To ease the initial configuration of hostapd on BISDN Linux, we ship an example
configuration file for the described EAPoL use case. The file can be found on
the switch at `/etc/hostapd/hostapd-wired.conf.example`. For this scenario, the
file can be copied without any modifications to configure hostapd for port2.
Please make sure to use the naming scheme `hostapd-wired-$PORTNAME.conf` to
allow the systemd service configured in the next step to find the right
configuration. For our scenario, the value of `$PORTNAME` is `port2`

```bash
sudo cp /etc/hostapd/hostapd-wired.conf.example /etc/hostapd/hostapd-wired-port2.conf
```

After the configuration was copied, the port specific hostapd service instance
can be enabled and started in systemd by running the commands below. Please make
sure to use the service naming scheme `hostapd-wired@$PORTNAME` to allow the
systemd service to find the right configuration for this hostapd service
instance. For our example, the value of `$PORTNAME` is `port2`

```bash
sudo systemctl enable hostapd-wired@port2.service
sudo systemctl start hostapd-wired@port2.service
```

After the service instance has been started, it should automatically connect to
the radiusd service configured and started before and be ready to authenticate
the supplicant connected to port2 following the EAPoL sequence.

### Configuration of wpa\_supplicant on Ubuntu for testing

To configure a Ubuntu server as supplicant, we first install the package
`wpa_supplicant` on it with the command shown below.

```bash
sudo apt install wpasupplicant
```

After the package is installed, we need to create a configuration for the
supplicant, with the same credentials we used for our freeRADIUS configuration
before. The configuration file needs to be created as
`/etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant-wired-$PORTNAME.conf`, while `$PORTNAME` is
the name of the port connected to `port2` of the BISDN Linux switch configured
before. For our example, the value of `$PORTNAME` is `eno2`. The content of the
file `/etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant-wired-eno2.conf` for our example
scenario on the server is shown below.

```text
ap_scan=0
network={
    key_mgmt=IEEE8021X
    eap=MD5
    identity="bob"
    password="hello"
}
```

After the configuration file was created, the service instance on our server for
the network interface `eno2` can be enabled and started by running the command
shown below.

```bash
sudo systemctl enable wpa_supplicant-wired@eno2
sudo systemctl start wpa_supplicant-wired@eno2
```

As soon as the service is started, the EAPoL authentication sequence of the
supplicant with the switch should be started and the corresponding port2 on the
switch should be unlocked.

If you connect a second supplicant (e.g. a second Ubuntu server with
wpa\_supplicant) following the process for radiusd and hostapd described above,
as well as assign IP addresses to the respective interfaces of both supplicants,
you should be able to send traffic between them after they have been
authenticated and authorized by the BISDN Linux switch.

## 802.1x with MAB

For this case, we assume that the supplicant is connected to port2 of the BISDN
Linux switch and is unable to use EAPoL. Instead of trying to authenticate, the
supplicant is just sending some network traffic towards the switch, to try to
reach other devices on the network. The BISDN Linux switch receives this traffic
and uses MAB to authorize the supplicant based on its MAC address and unlock
port2.

### Configuration of freeRADIUS

The upstream configuration reference for freeRADIUS, as well as the MAB specific
section can be found here:

- <https://wiki.freeradius.org/config/Configuration-files>
- <https://wiki.freeradius.org/guide/mac-auth>

The freeRADIUS installation on BISDN Linux comes with a set of configuration
files, which can be used with some minor extensions for our testing case.
The first extension to the default configuration needed is described in the
upstream documentation here:

- <https://wiki.freeradius.org/guide/mac-auth#plain-mac-auth_raddb-mods-available-files>

Since the option `compat = no` shown in this example has already been removed
from the freeRADIUS version shipped in BISDN Linux, we only need to extend the
file `/etc/raddb/mods-available/files` as shown below. If you try to use the
option `compat`, radiusd will fail to start.

BEFORE:

{% raw %}
```text
# -*- text -*-
#
#  $Id: e3f3bf568d92eba8eb17bbad590f846f2d9e1ac8 $

# Livingston-style 'users' file
#
# See "man users" for more information.
#
files {
        # Search for files in a subdirectory of mods-config which
        # matches this instance of the files module.
        moddir = ${modconfdir}/${.:instance}

        # The default key attribute to use for matches.  The content
        # of this attribute is used to match the "name" of the
        # entry.
        #key = "%{%{Stripped-User-Name}:-%{User-Name}}"

        #  The old "users" style file is now located here.
        filename = ${moddir}/authorize

        #  This is accepted for backwards compatibility
        #  It will be removed in a future release.
#       usersfile = ${moddir}/authorize

        #  These are accepted for backwards compatibility.
        #  They will be renamed in a future release.
        acctusersfile = ${moddir}/accounting
        preproxy_usersfile = ${moddir}/pre-proxy
}
```
{% endraw %}

AFTER:

{% raw %}
```text
# -*- text -*-
#
#  $Id: e3f3bf568d92eba8eb17bbad590f846f2d9e1ac8 $

# Livingston-style 'users' file
#
# See "man users" for more information.
#
files {
        # Search for files in a subdirectory of mods-config which
        # matches this instance of the files module.
        moddir = ${modconfdir}/${.:instance}

        # The default key attribute to use for matches.  The content
        # of this attribute is used to match the "name" of the
        # entry.
        #key = "%{%{Stripped-User-Name}:-%{User-Name}}"

        #  The old "users" style file is now located here.
        filename = ${moddir}/authorize

        #  This is accepted for backwards compatibility
        #  It will be removed in a future release.
#       usersfile = ${moddir}/authorize

        #  These are accepted for backwards compatibility.
        #  They will be renamed in a future release.
        acctusersfile = ${moddir}/accounting
        preproxy_usersfile = ${moddir}/pre-proxy
}
files authorized_macs {
        # The default key attribute to use for matches.  The content
        # of this attribute is used to match the "name" of the
        # entry.
        key = "%{Calling-Station-ID}"

        usersfile = ${confdir}/authorized_macs
}
```
{% endraw %}

The next file needed for MAB with freeRADIUS needs to be created at
`/etc/raddb/authorized_macs`, like documented upstream here:

- <https://wiki.freeradius.org/guide/mac-auth#plain-mac-auth_raddb-authorized_macs>

Assuming the MAC address on the port of our supplicant that is connected to our
switch is `1a:2b:3c:4d:5f:66`, the configuration on our switch should look like
the one shown below. Be aware that freeRADIUS will rewrite the MAC address of
the supplicant in the function `rewrite_calling_station_id` within the
`authorize` block to be all capital and use `-` as separator before comparing it
to the MAC in the authorized\_macs file.

```text
1A-2B-3C-4D-5F-66
        Reply-Message = "Device with MAC Address %{Calling-Station-Id} authorized for network access"
```

Last, but not least, we need to replace the authorization block in the
`/etc/raddb/sites-available/default` file on our BISDN Linux switch with the
block shown below.

```text
authorize {
        preprocess

        # If cleaning up the Calling-Station-Id...
        rewrite_calling_station_id

        # Now check against the authorized_macs file
        authorized_macs

        if (!ok) {
                # No match was found, so reject
                reject
        }
        else {
                # The MAC address was found, so update Auth-Type
                # to accept this auth.
                update control {
                        Auth-Type := Accept
                }
        }
}
```

The block shown above was copied without modifications from the upstream
documentation here:

- <https://wiki.freeradius.org/guide/mac-auth#plain-mac-auth_raddb-sites-available-default>

Please make sure to **replace** the `authorize {}` block and do not try to amend
the file. If you want to configure 802.1x EAPoL and MAB as fallback in
freeRADIUS, please refer to the upstream documentation here:

- <https://wiki.freeradius.org/guide/mac-auth#mac-auth-or-802-1x>

For the case documented upstream, you will also need to modify the
`/etc/raddb/users` file, as documented for our EAPoL based authentication
example above.

After those changes are done, the systemd service for radiusd can be enabled and
started with the commands shown below.

```bash
sudo systemctl enable radiusd.service
sudo systemctl start radiusd.service
```

The freeRADIUS daemon radiusd should now be running and be ready to accept
connections and requests from hostapd - which is configured in the next step.

### Configuration of hostapd

The upstream configuration reference for hostapd version 2.10 can be found here:

- <https://w1.fi/cgit/hostap/tree/hostapd/hostapd.conf?h=hostap_2_10>

To ease the initial configuration of hostapd on BISDN Linux, we ship an example
configuration file for the EAPoL use case. The file can be found on the switch
at `/etc/hostapd/hostapd-wired.conf.example`. For the MAB scenario, the
file can be copied, but has to be slightly modified, before it is used to
configure hostapd for port2.

Please make sure to use the naming scheme `hostapd-wired-$PORTNAME.conf` to
allow the systemd service configured in the next step to find the right
configuration. For our scenario, the value of `$PORTNAME` is `port2`

```bash
sudo cp /etc/hostapd/hostapd-wired.conf.example /etc/hostapd/hostapd-wired-port2.conf
```

The only line that has to be modified in the example configuration copied above,
is the one targeting `mac_auth`. By default, this option is set to `mac_auth=0`,
to completely disable MAC authentication bypassing. To enable MAB for our
scenario, we need to set it to `mac_auth=1` like shown below.

```text
...
# Enable MAC Authentication Bypass (MAB):
# 0 = disable MAB
# 1 = enable MAB
mac_auth=1
...
```

All other settings in this file can be kept as they are.

After the configuration was copied and modified, the port specific hostapd
service instance can be enabled and started in systemd by running the commands
below. Please make sure to use the service naming scheme
`hostapd-wired@$PORTNAME` to allow the systemd service to find the right
configuration for this hostapd service instance. For our example, the value of
`$PORTNAME` is `port2`

```bash
sudo systemctl enable hostapd-wired@port2.service
sudo systemctl start hostapd-wired@port2.service
```

After the service instance has been started, it should automatically connect to
the radiusd service configured and started before and be ready to authorize
the supplicant connected to port2 with MAB.

### Configuration of Ubuntu for testing

Nothing to do here!

Since MAB is based on just the MAC address of the supplicant, there is no
configuration needed on our Ubuntu test server. By default, it will be
authorized via MAB by its MAC address when sending the first couple of packets
towards the switch.

If you connect a second supplicant (e.g. a second Ubuntu server) following the
process for radiusd and hostapd described above, as well as assign IP addresses
to the respective interfaces of both supplicants, you should be able to send
traffic between them after they have been authorized by the BISDN Linux switch.

## Troubleshooting

In the unlikely case that following the example configurations given here did
not yield the expected outcome, you can try the steps documented below to narrow
down what the cause of the issue might be.

- Verify that the service instance of hostapd for the given port (e.g. port2)
  on the switch is up and running.

  ```bash
  sudo systemctl status hostapd-wired@port2

  ● hostapd-wired@port2.service - Hostapd IEEE 802.1X Authenticator
       Loaded: loaded (/lib/systemd/system/hostapd-wired@.service; enabled; vendor preset: disabled)
       Active: active (running) since Fri 2025-02-14 14:26:40 UTC; 1min 0s ago
     Main PID: 3415 (hostapd)
        Tasks: 1 (limit: 4721)
       Memory: 516.0K
       CGroup: /system.slice/system-hostapd\x2dwired.slice/hostapd-wired@port2.service
               └─ 3415 /usr/sbin/hostapd /etc/hostapd/hostapd-wired-port2.conf -P /run/hostapd-port2.pid -i port2
  ```

- Verify that radiusd on the switch is up and running (only applicable if you
  do not run an external authentication server).

  ```bash
  sudo systemctl status radiusd

  ● radiusd.service - FreeRADIUS high performance RADIUS server.
       Loaded: loaded (/lib/systemd/system/radiusd.service; enabled; vendor preset: disabled)
       Active: active (running) since Fri 2025-02-14 14:09:27 UTC; 26min ago
     Main PID: 3330 (radiusd)
        Tasks: 6 (limit: 4721)
       Memory: 39.8M
       CGroup: /system.slice/radiusd.service
               └─ 3330 /usr/sbin/radiusd -d /etc/raddb
  ```

- Verify that all ports connected to the swbridge and the bridge itself are up.

  ```bash
  sudo ip l show dev port2
  9: port2: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc pfifo_fast master swbridge state UP mode DEFAULT group default qlen 1000
      link/ether 04:f8:f8:22:f9:c2 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
  ```

  ```bash
  sudo ip l show dev swbridge
  6: swbridge: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc noqueue state UP mode DEFAULT group default qlen 1000
      link/ether c2:75:49:92:d5:ca brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
  ```

- Check the output from the hostapd service instance and verify that the
  authentication has completed successfully. Look for specific messages like
  `EAP Success` and `IEEE 802.1X: authorizing port`

  ```bash
  sudo journalctl -eu hostapd-wired@port2

  Feb 14 14:38:44 accton-as4610-54 systemd[1]: Started Hostapd IEEE 802.1X Authenticator.
  Feb 14 14:38:44 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: driver_linux_wired: attaching to port2 (9)
  ...
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: CTRL-EVENT-EAP-STARTED 0c:c4:7a:9c:27:d1
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: CTRL-EVENT-EAP-PROPOSED-METHOD vendor=0 method=1
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: STA 0c:c4:7a:9c:27:d1 IEEE 802.1X: Sending EAP Packet (identifier 54)
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: STA 0c:c4:7a:9c:27:d1 IEEE 802.1X: received EAP packet (code=2 id=54 len=8) from STA: EAP Response-Identity (1)
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: STA 0c:c4:7a:9c:27:d1 IEEE 802.1X: STA identity 'bob'
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: RADIUS Sending RADIUS message to authentication server
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: RADIUS Next RADIUS client retransmit in 3 seconds
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: RADIUS Received 80 bytes from RADIUS server
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: RADIUS Received RADIUS message
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: STA 0c:c4:7a:9c:27:d1 RADIUS: Received RADIUS packet matched with a pending request, round trip time 0.00 sec
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: STA 0c:c4:7a:9c:27:d1 IEEE 802.1X: decapsulated EAP packet (code=1 id=55 len=22) from RADIUS server: EAP-Request-MD5 (4)
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: STA 0c:c4:7a:9c:27:d1 IEEE 802.1X: Sending EAP Packet (identifier 55)
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: STA 0c:c4:7a:9c:27:d1 IEEE 802.1X: received EAP packet (code=2 id=55 len=22) from STA: EAP Response-MD5 (4)
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: RADIUS Sending RADIUS message to authentication server
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: RADIUS Next RADIUS client retransmit in 3 seconds
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: RADIUS Received 49 bytes from RADIUS server
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: RADIUS Received RADIUS message
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: STA 0c:c4:7a:9c:27:d1 RADIUS: Received RADIUS packet matched with a pending request, round trip time 0.00 sec
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: STA 0c:c4:7a:9c:27:d1 IEEE 802.1X: old identity 'bob' updated with User-Name from Access-Accept 'bob'
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: STA 0c:c4:7a:9c:27:d1 IEEE 802.1X: decapsulated EAP packet (code=3 id=55 len=4) from RADIUS server: EAP Success
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: CTRL-EVENT-EAP-SUCCESS2 0c:c4:7a:9c:27:d1
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: STA 0c:c4:7a:9c:27:d1 IEEE 802.1X: Sending EAP Packet (identifier 55)
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: authorizing 0c:c4:7a:9c:27:d1
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: AP-STA-CONNECTED 0c:c4:7a:9c:27:d1
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: STA 0c:c4:7a:9c:27:d1 IEEE 802.1X: authorizing port
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: STA 0c:c4:7a:9c:27:d1 RADIUS: starting accounting session EF57F24C58987FA3
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: RADIUS Sending RADIUS message to accounting server
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: RADIUS Next RADIUS client retransmit in 3 seconds
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: STA 0c:c4:7a:9c:27:d1 IEEE 802.1X: authenticated - EAP type: 4 (MD5)
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: STA 0c:c4:7a:9c:27:d1 RADIUS: starting accounting session EF57F24C58987FA3
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: RADIUS Received 20 bytes from RADIUS server
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: RADIUS Received RADIUS message
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: STA 0c:c4:7a:9c:27:d1 RADIUS: Received RADIUS packet matched with a pending request, round trip time 0.00 sec
  Feb 14 14:40:02 accton-as4610-54 hostapd[1434]: port2: STA 0c:c4:7a:9c:27:d1 IEEE 802.1X: authenticated - EAP type: 4 (MD5)
  ```
